Good morning.
How's the commerce been
for everyone so far?
Good?
Today we're going to talk about
advances in OpenGL for Mac OS X Lion.
Hopefully you're all in the right place.
If not, I won't take it personally if you
leave and go to your correct session.
So I assume most of you
are familiar with OpenGL,
but let's go over and review a bit.
OpenGL is the high-performance
rendering API that we offer in Mac OS X.
It's direct access to the GPU.
The GPU are very powerful
processors primed for graphics
that sit in all your machines.
And if you need direct,
high-performance access,
OpenGL is the way to go.
It's broadly used throughout the
industry for things like games,
visualization, medical,
all sorts of things, entertainment.
And it's also the foundation of all the
great visual technologies in Mac OS X.
So if you're used to
things like core image,
core animation, even Quartz Extreme,
the Windows server itself,
is built on the foundation of OpenGL.
So this is a way to give you
the power of the GPU and let you
harness it for your applications.
So let's start off with an introduction.
And you might be wondering where we're at
in Lion and what the state of OpenGL is,
what it looks like.
So what's new?
The big new thing is
the OpenGL Core Profile.
And this provides you with new
rendering features and new support
features and all kinds of new things
you can use in Lion to help your
application look and run great.
Spoiler alert.
So the OpenGL Core Profile.
All the new features we're providing in
Lion require you to use the Core Profile.
And this is a little different
than what you might be used to,
which is what we're
calling the Legacy Profile.
Legacy Profile
is fixed function and programmable.
You create the profile,
you can use the fixed function pipeline,
or you can write your own
shaders and use that pipeline.
In the Core Profile,
everything is fully programmable.
The Legacy Profile is completely
binary compatible with all the
apps you've already written,
so everything that you've written before
will continue to run just as great,
maybe even a little better online.
The Core Profile is all new, efficient,
and modern.
The legacy profile is default,
so when you create a new OpenGL app,
you'll still get the profile
that you've always gotten before.
If you want to use the new features,
you must opt in to the Core Profile.
This is a choice you can do.
Just put a few lines of code in,
and you'll get all the new features.
So new Core Profile features.
The big one is GLSL 150.
GLSL is the OpenGL shading language.
And we're introducing version 150
to you guys so you can use it,
which comes with a whole
slew of great new features.
Another new feature is
uniform buffer objects.
If you're familiar with other APIs,
this is quite analogous to the C buffer.
And it allows you to use a
buffer object as the backing for
the uniforms in your shaders.
Similarly,
there's texture buffer objects,
which is a texture backed
by a buffer object.
It can take advantage of texture
caching and other things.
A new way to do instancing,
which allows you to draw a whole
bunch of batches with one draw call.
And this is shader instancing.
We'll go through that in a second.
Snorm textures.
An Snorm texture is a normalized texture.
Normally a value in a texture can
go from 0 to whatever you'd like.
An Snorm texture goes from
0 to 1 or negative 1 to 1.
So Snorm is signed normalized.
It's also unsigned normalized.
So this allows you to use the full
range of bits in your texture to
just express the 0 to 1 range.
Multisample textures is a way to
do multisample render targets.
These are multisample textures to
allow you to do anti-aliasing as
you're rendering to off-screen buffers.
And last but not least, timer query.
Timer query allows you to
query GPU state and do some
high-performance performance counting,
stuff like that.
Float and integer rendering.
We have RG and multi-sample,
like I mentioned before.
Texture arrays, which are texture arrays
similar to 3D textures,
except that you don't
blend between the Z axis.
Conditional rendering,
which allows you to render
things conditionally based on
the output of an occlusion query.
And transform feedback,
which allows you to output rendering
things into buffer objects.
Other new features we're providing.
IOSurface.
IOSurface is a method to
share data between processes,
so you can share texture
data and surface data.
And automatic graphics switching.
If you've bought a
laptop in the last year,
year and a half,
you know you have two GPUs.
There's one that uses less power,
and then there's a super powerful one.
And from then until now,
you've always been
forced to write your app.
You create an OpenGL app,
and it has to run on the high-power GPU.
Well, now we're allowing you to use
the integrated GPU to make your
app have better battery life.
So let's jump right into
using the Core Profile.
What is the Core Profile?
How do I use it?
What does it give me?
Concept of the Core Profile,
new features and cleaner API.
You know,
this API has been around a long time,
and we've cut out some of the cruft.
It's more aligned to the hardware,
what the hardware actually does.
So a cleaner expression of the GPU power.
We want to really have you--
when you call an API call,
we want it to correspond to
something the GPU is actually doing.
And if you're familiar with iOS apps,
this is really similar to the
jump between ES 1.1 and ES 2.0.
The same sort of leaving
the fixed function behind,
going to fully programmable shaders,
and really giving you the power of
the GPU and putting it in your hands.
So very similar to ES 2.
So why change?
Like I said,
there's a lot of cruft in this API.
There has been in the past.
OpenGL was designed in 1992
for machines that look way
different than what we've got now.
So those Irix GL machines--
Hi, everyone.
I'm Matt Collins.
I'm the founder of OpenGL.
And I'm going to talk to you about
some of the things that we've
been doing to improve the GPU.
The first thing is that we've been
using the GPU for a long time.
So the GPU is really,
really different than the GPU that's
sitting in your machine right now.
They really look nothing alike.
So we really want to express what the
modern GPU looks like in this API.
We don't want to be stuck
back on something that came
out almost 20 years ago.
And this is because
these GPUs are really,
really powerful,
and they're really hungry for work.
And most of the time,
the GPU is going to be sitting
idle as you're using it.
And we want to keep it fed.
We want to send it lots and lots of
work so it's always doing something,
just stream all this data down
so it can crunch those numbers.
So let's go over what
we're gonna talk about.
First I'll go over getting started,
how to get started with the core profile,
what you need to do.
The differences from the legacy profile,
you know, what looks the same,
what looks different?
How do you wrap your head around this?
How do you send data to the GPU?
'Cause like I said,
we wanna keep it busy,
so we can keep it busy by
sending it tons of data at
once so it has something to do.
We'll go over shader development,
GLSL 150, what it means for you,
how it looks different from
the shaders you're writing now,
and how it looks different
from the shaders you might
have written for ES 2.0.
We'll also talk about API changes,
some differences in
flushing data to the GPU,
syncing data to the GPU,
and syncing different
threads in your program,
different execution to make sure
that the GPU has actually finished
what you think it's finished.
Then I'll go over a couple
tips and tricks and some
other things to watch out for.
So let's get started.
Requesting an OpenGL 3.2 context.
It's actually really easy.
If you look at this,
you see you need to add two things,
the OpenGL profile key and the
OpenGL profile version key.
So when you create your context,
you just have to add these two new
attributes and you'll get a Core Profile.
Core Profile is OpenGL 3.2 compliant.
And I'd like to call out that
if you use Interface Builder
to create your OpenGL apps,
you will actually need to
programmably create your context.
Interface Builder will not let
you create an OpenGL 3.2 context.
And we did this because we
want you to be sure you really
want the Core Profile context,
because the Core Profile
will not be compatible with
your previous OpenGL code.
So you create your attribute list,
and you pass it,
create a pixel format as usual,
pass that pixel format,
and create a context with it,
and now you have a context that
is the OpenGL Core Profile.
Now the differences from legacy profile.
Like I mentioned before,
everything is programmable.
There's no more fixed function.
And this is actually really cool because
you get a lot more flexibility and power.
And the GPU works this way.
Your modern GPU actually does not
have a fixed function pipeline in it.
When you're running old OpenGL apps,
the driver itself will create
shaders behind your back and sort of
emulate the fixed function pipeline.
So this is giving that power to you so
you know exactly what the GPU is doing.
The other main difference is
everything is now a batch draw
instead of immediate mode.
You might have been familiar
with calling GL begin,
GL end, passing it vertex by
vertex by vertex by vertex.
And we really want to get away from this.
We want to hook up the hose and feed
it millions of points at once so it
can have all this data to crunch.
It's much more efficient.
Because actually,
you can imagine sending vertex
by vertex over the bus is going
to be much less efficient than
sending 100K of data all at once.
So using the Core Profile,
how do we actually send
this data to the GPU?
Well, you're going to use a vertex
buffer for everything.
Many of you have probably
used VBOs in your code.
And now we're going to tell
you that this is the de facto
way to draw and upload data.
So you want to send data
once to the GPU and reuse.
You may ask, what happens if I have
data that I want to modify?
Well, you can still use a vertex buffer
object and update it as needed.
So everything you should send once
and reuse as much as possible.
You're also going to supply data to your
shader via a generic vertex attribute.
This is also something that's
been available for a while,
but now this is the de facto way
to supply data to your shader.
Everything is a generic vertex attribute.
You supply this with
vertex attribute array.
There's no more vertex pointer,
no more GL normal pointer,
anything like that.
Everything is a generic vertex attribute
and completely controlled by you.
You can interpret the data coming
into your shader however you'd like.
This gives you much more flexibility
because now you can just use
whatever you want in your shader.
You can have three attributes,
you can have two normals,
you can have eight colors,
whatever you want.
And this is all helped-- you
help manage this with what's
called a vertex array object.
This is something Apple introduced
to GL several years ago,
but it helps you manage
your buffers and enables.
So a vertex array object
coalesces all the enabled buffers,
all the bound pointers.
So you don't have to
continue to call bind buffer,
GL vertex attribute array,
GL enable vertex attribute array
over and over and over again.
Now you just call--
GL bind vertex array,
and it will bind all that
for you automatically.
So let's take a look at
what this looks like.
I'm going to talk about
uploading positions.
That's the most important
thing in graphics.
We want a bunch of vertex positions.
So I say,
pound define attribute position.
And I'm going to say this is
generic vertex attribute 0,
because we'll start at the beginning.
So first, I'm going to create my VAO,
my vertex array.
And I'll create it as normal
like you create everything else.
One of them passing the pointer.
Then I'll bind the vertex array so that
everything else I bind will be associated
with the currently bound vertex array.
Then I will bind my array buffer as
normal to whatever VBO I'd like to use.
And then instead of calling
glVertexPointer or glNormalPointer,
etc., I'll call glVertexAttribPointer.
And I've already decided I want
to use attribute 0 for this.
These are my positions.
So the first thing I put
into the argument list is my
pound-defined attribute position,
0.
Then,
similarly to the other pointer calls,
I say the number of
elements I have in this,
so 3.
I say floating point numbers.
The glFalse allows you to specify
whether you want this data
automatically normalized for you.
Since they're positions,
I probably don't want it normalized,
so I'm going to say no.
Then, as usual, I have the stride,
and then I have the offset
into my buffer object.
And then, lastly,
I have to remember that I want to enable.
[Transcript missing]
So you have 16 vertex attributes.
You may have more.
So you can query the limit to be sure if
you want to see if you have 32 or more.
But we guarantee you at least
16 across all renderers.
Like I mentioned,
enables and pointers are saved.
So this is great.
You only need to bind once.
Instead of having multiple bind calls,
you can bind your vertex array once.
and that's all you need.
Array buffer is not saved.
So when you say GL bind
buffer array buffer,
that's never actually used for rendering.
It's only used for GL map buffer,
GL buffer data, et cetera.
And the actual thing that binds a
specific vertex buffer object to
the attribute is the pointer call.
So that's what actually does the binding.
Other things you might want
to supply to your shader.
Well,
the big thing everyone asks about is,
how do I send a matrix down to my shader?
Well, it's quite simple.
You just use GL uniform matrix.
Now, there's no more matrix mode and
there's no more matrix stack.
And a lot of people say, "Oh, that sucks.
I really like the matrix stack." Well,
this is actually better.
gives you better program
control over what you're doing.
You no longer have to manage the stack.
Instead, in your render tree,
you could just associate a
transform with an object.
And when it comes time
to render that object,
you can upload it with
GL uniform matrix 4fv,
send it all up at once.
One thing to remember with
that function call is the count
is the number of matrices,
not the number of components
or the number of vectors.
So if you're going to
upload four matrices,
you would pass it a pointer
and you would say four,
not 16 or however many
components are going to be there.
Now,
I said you get better programmer control.
And this goes back to when
I said we want to express what
the GPU is actually doing here.
glMultMatrix and glRotateF,
all those functions,
were actually CPU side work.
When you did that,
the CPU would calculate these
matrices and upload it for you.
And you really don't want that.
As a programmer, you want to know exactly
what the API is doing.
You don't want it to do
some stuff on the CPU,
some stuff on the GPU.
You want to be sure,
I know exactly that this is
going to happen on the GPU.
This is going to happen on the CPU.
So you can associate your
transforms with your objects.
You can know that I did this
transformation myself in my code,
or I'm uploading it,
and I'm going to let the GPU do
this transformation in my shader.
And while you're thinking about that,
keep in mind that a single matrix
multiply is always going to be
faster than 10,000 matrix multiplies.
So if you have a vertex shader that's
going to multiply the projection
times the model view matrix,
that may occur 10,000 times,
or however many vertices you have.
If you do that multiply
yourself in your code,
that will happen once,
and you can upload that
pre-multiplied matrix to your shader.
That's going to be more efficient.
So keep in mind, we call it hoisting
things up the pipeline.
So usually,
the fragment stage will run more
often than the vertex stage,
and the vertex stage will, of course,
run more often than whatever
you're doing in your code.
So if stuff can be moved up,
you should definitely consider doing it.
It'll make things quite
a bit more efficient.
So what does a shader look like?
This is a pretty big shader,
so don't get overwhelmed when you see it.
I'll go over the interesting things.
Some of it may look familiar,
some of it may look a little different,
but we'll talk about each in detail.
So here's a vertex shader.
Looks pretty normal, a regular transform.
You know,
we have the normals being transformed,
normalized, a little matrix multiply,
some color that we're
passing down the pipeline.
And lastly, we output the position with
the model view projection.
Pretty straightforward.
A couple things look a little different.
You might be saying, well,
what are those?
So let's go through it.
So the first thing that you'll notice
is at the very top we have a new pragma,
#Version150.
This indicates to the compiler what
the GLSL version that we're using is.
lets the runtime know that, hey,
this is the new stuff.
Be prepared.
The next thing is
specifying shader inputs.
Now,
if you used vertex attributes before,
you might have been used
to saying attribute,
vec3, whatever.
Well,
now we've changed that a little simpler.
Now you just say in.
Designate this as an input to the shader,
and then you get to specify
whatever you want to call it.
So you hook them up to your
generic vertex attributes
that you already specified.
And there's two ways to do this.
You can bind the name position,
in this case,
to a specific vertex attribute.
So I had decided I wanted
to use zero before.
So you just say, bind attribute location.
You call this.
Make sure you call it before you link.
Call it for each of your attributes,
and you can decide which
vertex array you want to use.
So you can decide which generic vertex
attribute you want to source it from.
Alternatively, you can call get attribute
location after your link.
This will let the compiler decide
which generic vertex attribute it's
going to associate all the inputs with.
If you decide to do it this way,
one thing to keep in mind is
there's no guarantee as to order or
anything that may not be consistent.
So here I've heard them
position normal color.
So you might think, oh,
that would automatically get zero, one,
and two, right?
Well, maybe.
Maybe not.
Maybe a compiler changes.
Maybe it's different per GPU.
So don't guess that things are
always going to happen the same way.
And be sure to code a little defensively
to make sure that you're always
checking which generic attribute
corresponds to which name in your shader.
So in replaces the attribute keyword
that you may be familiar with.
Next, we have outs.
Outs specify what goes to the
next stage in the pipeline.
So this was similar to putting
varying before something before,
except that now it's explicitly saying,
"Yeah, this is an output." And that makes
more sense because varying-- yeah,
if you understand how the GPU works,
this is something that varies
across the entire primitive,
but output's a little
more straightforward.
Yeah, this is output of this stage,
and we'll go into the
input of the next stage.
So let's look at a fragment shader.
This is a little shorter,
but should be pretty similar
to things that you're used to.
Again, we have some inputs and uniforms.
Yeah, that looks normal.
Output, final color, huh?
But I thought we had color built-ins.
Well, we'll talk about that in a second.
And the shader itself is a
pretty simple lighting deal.
So let's talk about how this is a
little different from what you might
be used to with the fragment shader.
Again, we start off with the pragma,
pound version 150.
This is the new stuff,
so don't forget to put this
at the top of your shaders.
inputs.
Now, as you can imagine,
the output of the previous stage
becomes the input of this stage.
So whatever was labeled
out in your vertex stage,
or if you're using a geometry shader,
the geometry stage,
becomes the input of the fragment stage.
They have to be named the same thing to
make sure that you're passing through.
So in replaces varying
in the fragment stage.
And last but not least, the outputs.
Now there's no more
GLFragColor and GLFragData.
That's replaced by a
variable of your name,
and you can call it whatever you'd like.
and you label those as outputs.
So here I have out vec4 final color.
And similarly to how we bound
the vertex attributes going in,
we also bind the fragment
colors going out.
So I can say GL bind frag data location,
and I can bind it to a specific number
which corresponds to whatever color
attachment I've attached to my output.
And you would do this before
link similarly to how it
works in the vertex stage.
Also, you can do it after link
and let the compiler decide,
similarly to how the vertex state works.
And the same caveats apply here.
You can't guarantee that they'll
always be in the same order,
that they'll always
go to the same output.
So make sure you code defensively,
like I said before,
and make sure that you're binding
or you're getting the frag
data locations so your outputs
are going to where you expect.
So out replaces geo frag data,
geo frag color.
There's a limit on the
number of outputs you can do.
Check that limit to make sure
you're not trying to use too many.
So let's talk about these
API differences from the legacy
to the core as we move along.
So GeoVertexPointer, GeoNormalPointer,
GeoColorPointer,
that all becomes GeoVertexAttribPointer.
Pretty simple.
You can use each vertex attribute
for whatever you'd like.
Now,
when you were enabling things before,
you would say enable client state.
That's been completely subsumed
by enable vertex attribute array.
You just need to enable each
array numerically as you'd like.
As for rendering, GL begin and end,
completely gone, which is good because
they were slow anyway.
And now we're going to GL draw arrays,
GL draw elements.
And the next thing I'd like to call out,
and I'll talk about this a little later,
is GL get string with GL extensions.
Now before,
you wanted to query your extensions,
use get string, and it just gave you this
massive string full of GL arb,
gobbledygook.
That's a little different now.
Instead of getting a giant string
that's like 100 lines long,
you query each extension individually.
So you would say, GL get string i,
and you give it an index.
And each extension is indexed,
and you get each extension
string individually.
I'll go over that in a bit,
why that is and how it works,
so don't worry too much
about it right now.
Shader differences.
Like I said before,
all the built-ins from the
fixed function are gone.
So GL model view is now some uniform
that you're passing some matte for.
GL normal is something you
have to pass down yourself,
because you can use the attributes
for whatever you'd like.
In your vertex shader,
what you were labeling as
attributes before are now inputs,
and what you were labeling
as varings are now outputs.
Similarly, in the fragment shader,
varings from the previous stage
become the inputs of this stage,
and GL frag color becomes a variable
that you're deciding yourself.
So some differences subtle,
some not so subtle, but in the end,
it's for the best,
gives you much better control,
and helps you wrangle all these
ideas in your head because you can
call anything whatever you'd like.
So some other changes as we move
from the legacy to the core.
Mapping and flushing.
I think some of you guys are
probably familiar with the
Apple Flush Buffer Range extension.
We've had this for a while.
This has actually come
into the core of OpenGL.
And now not only can you
flush a range of a buffer,
you can actually map a range of a buffer.
So map buffer range will allow you to
map maybe a small portion of the buffer,
10%. You have 100k buffer,
you can map 1k of it.
And you can give it a couple flags,
map invalidate buffer,
which will tell the runtime that you
want to invalidate this entire buffer.
You're going to replace the entire thing.
All the data in it's stale.
Don't worry about it.
You can also invalidate only a range.
Like I said before,
I want to map this 1k range.
I'm going to mark that
1k range as invalid,
stale data.
The rest of it's good,
but this stuff I'm going to update.
There's also the map unsynchronized bit.
And this is important if you want to edit
something that you're currently using.
This will tell the GL runtime
not to synchronize on
previous uses of this buffer.
So this will also allow you to
stomp the memory you're using.
So be very careful when you give
it this flag that you're not
actually writing over something
you're currently drawing with.
And lastly,
we have the flush explicit bit.
This will tell GL not to actually flush
this data up until you tell it to.
So you must use flush map
buffer range in order for this
data to get up to your GPU.
So what does this look like?
Oh, sorry.
In order to use this,
You need to have some
synchronization primitives.
So if you've used Apple Fence
or something similar,
now we call them sync objects.
So to insert one of these sync objects,
a fence, into the command stream,
you would call glFenceSync.
And this puts a token into the command
and allows you to query it to see if
all the GPU commands before have run.
You can query it and tell it to
do a wait on the client side,
which means your CPU will wait
until the commands have done.
Or you can do a wait on the service side,
which means the GPU will wait.
And this allows you to do
interesting synchronization ideas,
like issue a bunch of
commands and put in a fence.
Then on another thread,
you can wait on that fence,
put a GPU wait,
then issue a bunch of other commands.
And this will guarantee that
the first thread's commands
have executed before the second.
So you can queue up commands
based on earlier operations and
guarantee they will happen in order.
Now, make sure you flush appropriately.
So the way the GL works is a command
buffer fills up with commands,
and when it gets to the end,
spits them out to the GPU and
they do a bunch of work.
Now, you can imagine if you
have this big buffer,
and you fill it up halfway,
and then you put your fence here,
you could be sitting there for a
long time because nothing's going to
be sent to the GPU and it fills up,
unless you tell it to flush.
So if you want to make sure everything
keeps going normally at a good rate,
then make sure you flush appropriately.
Now, this is a fine balancing act,
because you don't want to flush too
much-- that's going to be slow-- and
you don't want to flush too little.
So take a look at your app and
try to figure out what the precise
amount of flushing is right for you.
So here's what a fence sync looks like.
You insert a fence into
the command stream.
Pretty simple, fence sync.
GPU, wait for-- you know, sync commands.
And that's the only token
you can give this right now.
Maybe more will be added,
but that's what we've got.
Map your buffer range.
And then I can wait, and it'll tell me if
my commands are done.
Pretty simple.
Now, I can use this to actually do stuff
in the background while I'm waiting.
As I map this buffer range,
I can wait, and on my fence,
I can test to see if all my
previous commands are done.
If they are done,
I can modify this buffer and do things,
you know, to update it.
If they're not done,
I might want to do some other work so
I'm not stomping the memory I'm using.
So this is a way to synchronize
your use of buffer objects with
your application and updates.
And then when I'm done
updating my buffer,
I say flush map buffer range.
Then I'm going to want
to delete my fence,
and I'm going to want
to un-map my buffer.
So if you're actually using
the unsynchronized bit,
these fences, these sinks,
are a great way to make sure you're
not actually stomping your memory.
Because you can insert a
fence after your draws,
and then you can be sure
that all your draws are done,
and you're not going to be modifying
the data that those draws were using.
The next thing we'll talk
about is off-screen rendering.
Now, we've been pushing
FBO for several years now,
and now we're finally giving
you the last push to move to it,
because in the core profile,
there is no more pBuffer.
FBOs are what you're going to
use for rendering off-screen.
This is actually good,
because I think FBOs are a whole
lot easier to use than pBuffers.
Much more efficient,
the API is much cleaner,
and the error checking is more strict,
which will help you find bugs,
because you never know,
when you port something over and
you start getting these errors,
it turns out that, oh, wait,
I did that wrong.
So stricter error checking is
actually really good to catch,
you know,
sort of small issues in your code.
Now,
all this might look a little familiar
to you if you've been using ES 2.0.
You know,
going straight from the fixed function,
fully programmable, using generic vertex
attributes for everything,
no more matrix stack,
managing the matrices yourself.
So I'll do a little quick comparison
between ES 2.0 and the GL Core Profile.
had a lot of the same reasonings
behind them to make these changes.
So ES 2.0 uses generic vertex attributes,
but you'll use the
attribute keyword there.
And here, similarly to the legacy profile
compared to the core profile,
you'll use in.
And again, there's varying in ES 2.0,
which becomes out.
Varyings in the fragment
stage becomes in.
And geofragcolor is still in ES 2.0,
but like I mentioned before,
now you have your own variable name.
It can be called whatever you'd like.
The more interesting differences
are in Cocoa and how you set
up your ES 2.0 rendering.
On the iPhone or on the iPad in iOS,
you'll have the Eagle layer.
You'll grab the EAGL layer,
and you'll start rendering into that.
Well, you don't have to do that in Lion.
We have the NSOpenGL view,
which is a standalone object,
and it allows you to
render right into it.
And similarly,
how you have an Eagle context in iOS,
there's an NSOpenGL context.
on the desktop.
And lastly, when you're presenting your
rendering to the screen in iOS,
you're going to use
present render buffer.
Instead of doing that here,
you're actually going to draw into FBO0.
FBO0 is the back buffer on the system.
So if you have a window,
if you have a drawable, you have FBO0.
Make sure you do have a drawable, though.
If you don't have a window on the
screen and you create a context,
your drawing will go nowhere
and there'll be an error.
So make sure you actually
have a system drawable.
And to present this information to
the user to send this to the screen,
you're going to use flush buffer.
So a quick recap.
And this OpenGL view
is a standalone object.
You create the view and
you attach it to a window.
You can do this in Interface Builder.
You don't need to grab the GL layer.
You don't need to use Core Animation.
And you must use the flush buffer
method of the context in order
to get that information onto the
screen so that the user can see
whatever great graphics you've done.
So quick summary.
Use the Core Profile.
It's great.
A lot of modern features, better API.
Use the VAOs to group the buffers
that you've got to help you manage
your enables and all your state.
Use your generic vertex
attributes to supply data,
as much data as you'd like.
And use OpenGL 1.5 for your shaders.
And that's about it for the Core Profile.
Now tips.
I mentioned talking about
querying extension before,
so I'll give you a quick
hint how to do that.
GL get string,
GL extensions with an index.
That's indexed from zero to
the value of GLNUM extensions.
And individual extension
strings are given to you by this
result instead of one long one.
Now, like everything else,
you cannot guarantee what order these
extension strings will come out in.
Certain renderers may be
reverse alphabetical order.
Another renderer may be
in alphabetical order.
A third renderer may be
in some random order.
So you're going to have to go
through all of them to make
sure that they're all enabled.
So query the GL extensions,
the number of extensions
with get integer.
And then you can loop over like I have
here and just test each extension string
to see which ones are available for you.
Don't forget to include GL3.h.
This is OpenGL 3.2,
so there's GL3.h and GL3x.h
if you're using extensions.
Calling deprecated API will error.
It'll give you invalid operations,
so you can't call vertex
pointer or anything like that.
That's not valid.
And the other thing to keep in mind is
there is no vertex array object zero.
So if you start binding
things without creating a VAO,
nothing will get to your shader.
You must create a VAO and you
must bind it before you start
binding vertex attributes.
And like I mentioned before,
there must be a drawable
attached to FBO0.
So if you don't have a
window on the screen,
you don't have a drawable,
you can't actually draw anything,
which seems a little straightforward,
but it's worth repeating.
All right, let's get into the cool stuff.
New rendering features.
Uniform buffer objects.
This is something people have
requested for a long time,
and they're really cool.
They allow you to upload and store
uniform data as a buffer object and
upload it in massive chunks at once.
So you use a buffer object for storage,
similar to how you use
it for vertex data.
Now you can use it for uniform data.
And this is faster than
calls to GL uniform.
So instead of updating
each uniform at once,
you know, GL uniform, GL uniform,
GL uniform, you can now put it into a
UBO and upload this all at once.
all in one chunk.
So what does this look like?
Well, it kind of looks like a C struct.
See, we have the layout which specifies
that this is going to go in order.
So here I have a whole bunch of matrices.
This is just going to be matrix, matrix,
matrix, tightly packed.
There may be some padding
to make sure we're aligned,
so keep that in mind.
And so you specify it by
specifying the layout uniform UBO,
which is going to be the external name
in your code that you reference this by.
Then you declare it like a C struct.
I just have a bunch of matrices here.
And then I'm calling it block.
So later on in my shader,
I'm going to refer to it as block.mv.
This is going to be the first matrix.
Quick, simple shader to give you guys
an idea of how this works.
So pretty straightforward.
Now you just have to figure out, well,
how do I hook this up to the
data that's in my program?
Well, it's pretty simple.
Again, you need a binding point
that you define yourself.
I'm going to call it block binding here.
And I need to get the index
of my UBO from my shader.
So I do that with GL get
uniform block index.
And like I said, in my shader,
I had called it UBO.
And now I grab it with this function,
the, oops, UBO.
will now show you how to
bind a buffer to your shader.
In this example, I'm going to use the
actual UBO from my shader.
Uniform block binding specifies my UBO is
now going to be binding point zero.
This is so when I bind a
buffer at the very end,
I can specify that I want this
bound to buffer the UBO zero.
So here I'm using bind buffer
range to bind a buffer to my UBO,
but you can also use bind buffer base.
So pretty straightforward, not too bad.
So, hooking it all up,
get the UBL block index,
which is similar to
the attribute location.
Set the block binding index,
which you get to specify yourself,
and then bind your buffer object to that
block binding index that you specified.
You can use bind buffer
range or bind buffer base,
and specify buffer some
existing uniform buffer.
Remember,
you want to check your size limits.
UBOs cannot be infinitely big,
so query the limits to make
sure that you're using a
UBO that's not too enormous.
Just like VBOs, you cannot modify a
UBO that's being used to draw.
So you can get around this
by orphaning your buffer,
which you can do by calling
buffer data with null.
And that will tell the driver,
keep using this buffer,
and then get rid of it
when you're done with it.
But right now, I need a new one.
Or there's the old standby of
double buffering your data,
which is probably the most
straightforward and easiest way to do it.
Split frequently used and modified
UBOs into separate objects.
If you have a UBO that's going
to be updated once a frame,
and you have a UBO that's going
to be updated once a draw,
these should be completely
separate objects.
You shouldn't put them into
the same uniform buffer object.
and don't update more than you need to.
Pretty self-explanatory.
If you can update something once a frame,
you should.
If you have to update it once a draw,
well, then you have to.
But if you don't have to, don't do it.
Because the less data
you send up to the GPU,
the better overall.
Now, similar to a UBO,
we have a texture buffer object, a TBO.
This is a new texture target,
GL texture buffer,
and a new sampler type,
which is sampler buffer.
This is quite similar to a UBO,
except that it's a giant 1D texture.
And this allows you to do fast uploads,
but it also takes advantage
of texture caching.
All of your texture units have
a cache associated with them,
and this will allow you to do
fetches that could be uniform data,
also backed with that cache.
And similarly to a UBO,
you have to check your
texture size limits,
because there are limits to the amount
of data that can be used with a TBO.
So how to do this really quickly?
You generate a texture as normal,
and then you bind a texture
to the texture buffer target.
And then you use this text buffer call.
Now, a texture buffer is backed by a
previously existing buffer object.
So this does not actually allocate
brand new memory from nowhere.
You must already have a buffer
object with this data in it.
So keep that in mind when
you're binding your TBO.
Shader layout is pretty simple.
Just declare a sampler buffer.
[Transcript missing]
Instancing.
You might have heard me talk last year
when I talked about divisor instancing.
Now we have shader instancing.
Now this is a new built in to
your shader called instance ID.
And this will increase monotonically
depending on the number of
instances you're rendering.
So the first instance, this will be zero,
the second, it will be one and so on.
And you can use this to index
uniform or texture data,
something like a skinning
matrix survey would be great.
If you want to draw 100 skin guys,
you upload a ton of matrices and then you
draw an instance so that guy zero gets
the bones for instance zero and so on.
Let's take a quick look at the shader.
Looks pretty simple.
So I have a UBO here.
And when I access it,
I access it with the instance ID.
So here,
whatever model new matrix I'm using
for this instance is just indexed into
this giant array of matrices I have.
Easy way to do instancing,
pretty straightforward.
Next, we have multi-sample textures.
These are multi-sample render targets,
another new texture target.
To create a multi-sample texture,
you need to decide how many
samples you'd like and whether
they're a fixed sample size.
Now, the fixed sample size means each
sample in the texture will be the
same size and in the same place,
proportionally.
You can decide what's right for
your rendering or what you'd like.
Then you use Tech Image 2D Multi-Sample,
and quite similar to
the regular Tech Image,
but now you want to supply
your sample count and whether
sample location is fixed or not.
So you could use this for
something like deferred rendering.
Deferred rendering does not typically
handle multi-sampling very well,
but if you multi-sample
each slice of the G buffer,
you can actually get some cool
anti-aliasing out of here.
So in this case,
I have a multi-sample texture
for my positions on the left.
I have a multi-sample texture for my
normals in the middle and a multi-sample
texture for the albedo on the right.
And these then feed into
the final composited image,
and I get an anti-alias teapot
with deferred rendering.
Now keep in mind,
this will take a little bit more
RAM than a regular deferred renderer,
but you'll actually get the
benefits of anti-aliasing this way.
So to access this in the shader,
here's a quick shader for
my deferred rendering.
I declare a multi-sample texture sampler.
And then I actually need to loop
over all my samples to decide
how I'm going to resolve this,
because these are not
resolved automatically.
You have to do the resolve yourself.
So like I mentioned before,
TexelFetch uses integer coordinates.
So you need to actually calculate
your normalized coordinates and
make them into integer coordinates,
unless you're specifying
integer coordinates yourself.
You can do this with the
texture size built in.
You use texture size and
you give it a sampler,
and it will give you the width
and the height of that texture.
So here I'm just multiplying
my normalized coordinates by
the width and the height to
get the integer coordinates.
And I'm using Texel Fetch.
to resolve these.
So I loop over samples.
So maybe I have four samples
in my multi-sample texture.
I loop over and resolve it sample by
sample and accumulate this into my color.
So pretty straightforward
and quite simple,
but an interesting technique nonetheless.
Some other quick tips and tricks.
If you're using the legacy context,
keep in mind that texture2d.lod,
which is something
I see in a lot of games,
is actually an extension.
This is not a built-in.
If you want to use this functionality,
you need to use the pound extension
pragma and require it so the shader
compiler knows that you want to use this.
Another thing I want to bring up is that
TBO and PBO are actually separate things.
Now, we're introducing TBO,
which sounds similar to PBO,
the pixel buffer object,
but these actually are
not the same thing at all.
Texture buffer object is a
texture-backed buffer storage.
Pixel buffer object is more used
for asynchronous texture upload.
So keep that in mind when you're
thinking about the two of them
and when you're writing your app.
Make sure you pick the right
one for whatever job is at hand.
So let's quickly go over some
other new features that we're
bringing forward in Lion.
The first one that I'm really excited
about is automatic graphics switching,
and we really want you
to save the battery.
So what is automatic switching?
Well, like I said,
if you bought a laptop in the last year,
year and a half,
you know you have two GPUs in there.
You have one GPU that's integrated,
doesn't use much power,
has great battery life,
and you have one that's discrete,
which is really powerful.
Now,
we're giving you the power to use the
integrated GPU so that your apps and your
users can have really good battery life.
In order to do this,
the first thing you have to do is create
a pixel format that tracks multiple GPUs.
And this is the Allow Offline
Renderer pixel format.
So put that into your declaration
when you create your context.
Now,
to actually support the integrated GPU,
you just have to add an
attribute to your plist,
which is this
NSSupportsAutomaticGraphicSwitching.
This is a Boolean attribute.
You just set it to yes.
That tells the system, hey,
I want to run on the integrated GPU.
If you want more information
about doing this,
more information about
supporting multiple GPUs,
you can see session 310,
which is from WWDC 2009.
Now, if you're going to do this,
I can't stress enough,
test on actual hardware.
The driver for the integrated
parts is different than the
driver for the discrete parts.
They may have different characteristics.
So you want to make sure your app
runs well on the integrated driver
that you get the performance you want
and there are no rendering errors.
You also want to make sure that your
app survives switching between the two.
So let's say you have an application
that's running on the integrated
part and then the system decides,
hey, I need the discrete part,
so I'm going to kick it up.
All the applications will move over.
And you want to make sure
your app moves over cleanly,
smoothly, without any flickering or
any texture corruption.
So you can do that by starting up your
app and then opening another GL app,
maybe even something as simple as chess,
to make sure you survive the
transition without any weird artifacts.
Also, make sure the reverse is true.
So when everything is running on discrete
and you close down all the applications
that require the high-power GPU,
you want to make sure your app
switches back to the integrated
GPU gracefully as well.
So make sure you test on actual
hardware if you're doing this.
A lot of latent bugs will
show up as weird flickering,
slight texture corruption
for a split second,
something like that.
And that usually means that there's
some issue with the way you're
uploading textures or you're not
doing something completely safely.
And if you do this and you figure, like,
man, I'm doing everything right,
as always, feel free to file a bug.
Some other cool stuff.
I hope you all went to the OpenCL talks.
If not, I highly encourage you
to go check them out.
Talked about a lot of cool stuff that
we're bringing forward in Lion in OpenCL.
IOSurface.
IOSurface will let you share
things between contexts and apps.
Now,
you cannot share between an OpenGL legacy
context and an OpenGL core context.
One thing to keep in mind.
You absolutely must share data.
You can try IOSurface.
And lastly, OpenGL Profiler.
OpenGL Profiler is our awesome
profiler tool that lets you
profile your app and debug it.
Now we've added a great new feature,
which is remote profiling.
So you can control profiler from
one machine and run the app on
another machine and actually
control it over the network,
which is great,
especially for full screen apps.
So full screen modes,
speaking of full screen.
If you want full screen,
the best way to do this is something
we've been saying for a couple years,
is just create a covering window.
Cover the entire screen and draw to it.
This gives you all the benefits of
full screen and none of the drawbacks.
It also will give you a slight
performance benefit as we
automatically switch you into the
high performance rendering path in
terms of compositing to the screen.
This also has the benefit,
if there's a notification
that needs to pop up,
the user actually will get
the notifications without
anything blocking the way.
Because before,
if you had captured the fullscreen,
they could have 10 or 15 windows
behind there that they'd never seen.
If you absolutely must switch modes,
check the QAs that we've
got on the developer site.
There's a couple of
things that you can use,
but again, we'd like to encourage you
to actually just create the
fullscreen covering window.
Now, I know some apps will use
the CG display base address,
which used to give you
the frame buffer pointer.
This returns null now.
You can no longer grab it.
So keep that in mind.
Don't use it.
You'll get null, and then you'll crash,
which is undesirable, to say the least.
If you're interested in video capture
and capturing things for the screen,
there's been a couple of
great AV Foundation talks.
I'll go over what they were at the end,
and you can go check those out if you're
wondering how to capture from the screen.
So a quick wrap up.
We have lots of great
new features in Lion.
Want to take advantage
of the Core Profile.
Create that context.
Create a couple of VAOs.
Use your generic vertex attributes.
And use GLSL 150.
And try out the new features.
Try out instancing.
Use UBOs.
Use TBOs.
Use multi-sample textures.
These are all really cool,
powerful features you can use to
make your applications look great.
So try them out.
Integrate them into your apps.
Let us know what you like about them,
what you don't like about them.
We're always listening.
And now I'm going to
show you a quick demo,
demoing instancing.
So here we've got a galaxy
and staying on that theme.
So I want to draw this planet.
Looks pretty cool.
It's got some asteroids floating around.
And as you can see,
I'm making 10,000 draw calls.
And I have-- or sorry, 1,000 draw calls.
And I have 1,000 objects,
which is about 70,000 vertices.
And I'd really like more.
I'm really into more.
So let's say 2,000.
You can see things are getting a little
slow as I draw all these asteroids.
So I can draw about
7,000 of them with 60,
but I really like-- this
doesn't look very realistic.
I want more density.
I want 50,000.
That looks okay.
We're starting to get there,
but really I'd like, you know, like 100.
That'd be great.
So yeah, so now I have my 100,000.
I'm running at 4/5,
and this isn't really acceptable.
But if I have instancing--
I'm now running at 100 fips.
This is great.
So I can even put in more.
Oh, man, 130, 140, 150.
Oh, let's do more.
Let's see.
170.
Yeah, so we'll top out about 180,000.
That looks much more
like an actual planet.
And you can see I have
a nice little shadow,
and the asteroids are slightly colored,
because we're thinking, like, Saturn has,
you know, slightly colored rings.
Now we're in the dark of the planet.
So you can see here that with a UBO,
I actually can draw all
this with 176 draw calls,
which is way better than
the 180,000 draw calls.
Now, let's see how slow-- if
I go back to non-instanced,
yeah.
So that's 180,000 draws.
That's 176.
Now, I have to do 176 because,
as I said before,
there's a limit to the size of the UBO.
However, the TBO limit is much greater.
So I can actually do this
with one draw call with a TBO.
This is 12 million vertices,
12.6 million vertices
with a single draw call.
And I get 60 frames a second,
one draw call, runs super fast.
So instancing is really cool.
You can use, I mean,
you can instance whatever you like.
It doesn't have to be asteroids,
what we've got here.
I mean, you can see that each asteroid
is slightly spinning and it's
rotating around the planet.
So you can actually have them
be doing things completely
independent of each other,
even though you're only
using one draw call.
So that's a quick instancing demo,
just to give you an idea of what you
can accomplish with this technique.
It's pretty cool.
Now, if you need more information,
Alan Schafer is our graphic and
games technologies evangelist.
Drop him an email.
He's always waiting to hear from you.
And if you want to
hear more about OpenGL,
check out the OpenGL programming guide.
Now, right now,
it's still in pre-release because
Lion has not made it out to the public.
But you guys can check it
out on developer.apple.com.
Couple of more pieces of information.
We have technical
QAs about screen capture,
an image snapshot,
and using the integrated GPU.
And if you're curious
which QA numbers they are,
they're in the link here.
But 1740 is capturing
screen activity to a movie.
1741 is how to take an image snapshot.
Using the integrated GPU is 1734.
And another tech note on
supporting multiple GPUs,
because if you do want to
use the integrated GPU,
that is equivalent to
supporting multiple GPUs,
because you will actually have two.
There's the integrated
one and the discrete one.
So make sure you check those out if
you're interested in any of those topics.
These are the related sessions.
Unfortunately, they've already passed,
but you can go check out the videos.
So there's the best
practices for OpenGL ES.
A lot of those apply to the desktop
as well because ES 2.0 and the
Core Profile are quite similar.
Of course, you have a little bit
more power on the desktop.
And then there's introducing
AV Foundation Capture,
which we'll go over stuff about
capturing stuff from the display
if you're interested in that.
And that's it.
Thanks for coming to hear me talk,
and I hope to see you at the lab.